“faroolu meŋ be naaneeriŋ, woolu le jiyoo ka bori ñoo kaŋ” Rough Translation: Rice fields with the same boarders share the same waters Meaning: 1) You can live without friends but you can’t live without your neighbors, or 2) “we’re all in this together”
“kairo sill maŋ jaŋ faa” Rough Translation: The road of peace is not far Meaning: 1) If you are always in a hurry you will never have peace, 2) No matter the journey/situation, you can always have peace with yourself
“Sulu Ko niŋ I ye meŋ jee, I harijewo be Jee” Rough Translation: The henna said, anything you see, your luck is there.  Meaning: “If you want it you can have it,” especially referring to guys looking for girls
“doomaŋ doomaŋ le ka noowulu” Rough Translation: “Going little by little gives birth to new abilities”  Meaning: Practice makes perfect
“Samaa la naa jonkonwo tara sinandine” Rough Tanslation: Whether it rains or not the toilet will always be wet  Meaning:  Some people/things will never change, or 2) some actions will never change who a person really is.
“Ninaa joo mu niñaa le ti” Rough Tanslation: A good action rewards a good action  Meaning:  Kindness repays kindness.
“Tooña mu mesendoo le ti dindiŋ ka tombaŋ noo keeba ka tomoŋ” Rough Translation: The truth is like a needle, an old man and a young man can pick it up.  Meaning: The truth does not belong to one person, it can be in anyone, it is indifferent to age and other differences.
“Taŋ taŋ kosoo niŋ juu ŋañaa buka taa ñoŋ na” Rough translation: Beating drums and scratching your butt do not go together.  Meaning: take it slow, focus on one thing at a time.
“Faloo buka sawuŋ a diŋo ye ŋunuma” Rough translation: A donkey doesn’t jump in order for his child to crawl. Meaning: Children will learn the habits of their parents)
“Kebaa siitoo ka meŋ je, diŋo lootoo buka woo je” Rough translation:  What elders see in a sitting position is not the same as what a child can see standing.  Meaning:  Elder’s have more wisdom than children, respect your elders.
“I ye I jaatii tara meŋ na, ining a si wooke” Rough translation:  What you find your host or patron doing, do like wise. Meaning: similar to, “when in Rome, do as the Romans do”
“Wandi kohooba I ka I juu buusu” Rough translation: Someone else’s diarrhea makes your ass itch. Meaning: keep to yourself, don’t mess around with other people’s affairs, it’s none of your business.
“Sio le ka jutoo wuluu” Rough translation: Living together for a while makes people get on each others backs. Meaning: familiarity breeds contempt.
“Yiroo simee baa kono naa-o-naa ate kela bamboo ti” Rough translation: no matter how long a tree stays in the water it will never become a crocodile. Meaning: you are what you are,  it is hopeless it if it won’t change, you can try and try but you won’t suceed
“Dubeŋ ñinilaa niŋ fitiroo benta” Rough translation: The searcher for the shade will me the dusk.  Meaning: Seek and you shall find, the opportunity will arise.
“Ninsoo meŋ be faala saama, woo maŋ bina kala samaŋ sii” Rough translation: For the cows you’ll be killing tomorrow, today isn’t the day to measure his horns.  Meaning: ‘Don’t count your chickens before they hatch’
